---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# STORY 1. ‘We are struggling to survive’: Resistance against mining in Acacoyagua, Chiapas

### Jes Ciacci (Sursiendo)

> *We are not moving from here until the machines are gone. We are not
> afraid; we have the courage to be here even if they tell us we are
> being sued.*

– Member of the Frente Popular en Defensa del Soconusco 20 de Junio
(FPDS) during the ‘José Luciano’ roadblock set up to prevent access to
the Casas Viejas mine in the municipality of Acacoyagua, in Chiapas,
Mexico.

## Extractivism and finite resources

Mining is often considered the ‘mother’ of all modern industries. If
minerals are so essential, why do we see so many resistance hotspots in
the countries where they are mined?

Minerals are part of our everyday lives. Without them, life as we know
it would be impossible. They are also found in the technologies we use.
A cell phone, for example, contains more than 200 minerals, 80 chemical
elements and over 300 alloys and varieties of plastic.[^11STORY1_1] Where do our
devices come from? What do we know about their impacts?

We often hear news about the data extractivism that is inherent to the
business model of the large digital platforms. But we know very little
about the ‘other’ extractivisms found throughout their chain of
production. The assumption behind the production of these technologies,
from their very design, is that the world has infinite resources, when
in truth we live in a world of finite resources.

When we look at the economy of materials we find a linear system. Raw
materials are harvested and extracted, transformed, transported,
assembled, transported again, consumed, transported yet again and
finally disposed of as waste. And in each of these stages the variable
of ‘people’ is not factored into the equations.

However, we live in a world of finite resources, of cycles and not
linear systems, with people involved in every tiny aspect of these
chains of production. Moreover, in these systems some people are heard
more than others, while the web of public policies and economic
diplomacy favors corporations over local populations.

A technological development model anchored in this extractivist
conception entails strong negative impacts both on societies and on the
environment.

## Resistance against mining in El Soconusco, Chiapas

Mexico is one of the 17 megadiverse countries in the world and one of
the leading in Latin America, home to a wide variety of native
species.[^11STORY1_2] Among the reasons that explain the existence of such a
variety of plants, animals, fungi and microorganisms are the diversity
of climates, the mix of biogeographic areas and a complex topography of
mountain chains that includes the Sierra Madre de Chiapas, in southeast
Mexico.

Our devices contain a large number of minerals that are extracted from
that biodiversity for use in the production of casings, circuits,
capacitors, screens and sensors. Some of those minerals are found in
Chiapas, where nearly 20% of the territory is under mining concessions.
As of September 2019, the Ministry of the Economy had 140 open-pit mines
registered, with operating permits extending as late as 2060 and with a
high consumption of water.[^11STORY1_3] ‘A small mine consumes around 250,000
litres per hour, while a large one consumes between one and three
million litres in that same amount of time’.[^11STORY1_4]

Concession documents deliberately omit information concerning impacts on
natural diversity and human health. This was one of the reasons that led
the people of the municipality of Acacoyagua[^11STORY1_5] to organize against
mining activities. Some 17,000 inhabitants live in that municipality
under the protection of La Encrucijada and El Triunfo biosphere
reserves, in a region known as El Soconusco, which has 13 active mining
concessions for gold, silver, lead, zinc, iron and titanium extraction.

The leading mineral mined in the area is titanium.[^11STORY1_6] It is most
commonly transformed into titanium oxide for use as a whitening agent in
cosmetics, toothpaste, paint and food products such as milk. Titanium is
also found in surgical instruments, firearms and, of course, computers
and other electronic devices.

On 20 June 2015, the local population, concerned over the impact they
saw on their health and on the environment, formed the Frente Popular en
Defensa del Soconusco (FPDS or the People’s Front for the Defence of
Soconusco), a peaceful citizens’ movement. A little over a year later
they set up two camps and, with just a rope, blocked any machinery from
reaching the mines. Libertad Díaz Vera, who has been with the FPDS since
its inception, recalls how as early as 2006, people in Acacoyagua
started noticing the arrival of companies interested in mining. The
first permits, however, date from 2012 and they were approved without
any information or consultation processes that took into account the
needs of the local population in terms of times and modalities.

By the year 2015 the first health impacts were evident, in particular
skin conditions such as hives, white spots and dryness, but there was
also a rise in the number of cancer patients. Juan Velázquez, a local
doctor, estimates that between 2005 and 2015, the death rate for cancer
increased from 7% to 22%. ‘Cancer in general, but in particular liver
cancer, became the leading cause of death in the area. We are struggling
to survive’, because mining activities release toxic and radioactive
particles, such as thorium and silicon.[^11STORY1_7]

The most evident change in the environment was the pollution of the
waters of the Cacaluta, the region’s main river, which runs from the
reserve to the coast of Chiapas, supplying water to the Acacoyagua
region. ‘The municipality has a system of flowing water. What this means
is that the river replenishes the groundwater and brings water to
households. As there is no sewage system, everything that filters into
the water goes directly into people’s mouths’, said Díaz Vera.

At the same time illnesses increased, the fish also started to die. The
locals could no longer eat the mojarra fish, large river prawns,
lobsters and sardines they had always fished. ‘People started talking
then, wondering what was happening.’ That was the beginning of the
efforts to defend the territory, which have led not only to declaring
the municipality free from mining activities, but also to questioning
other forms of overharvesting the land, including existing
agribusinesses in the area.

An article published in Mongabay magazine notes that ‘in the opinion of
the Chiapas representative of the Ministry of the Environment
(SEMARNAT), Amado Ríos, the prospecting and mining permits granted to El
Puntal were for extracting raw material to be processed elsewhere to
obtain titanium, so that the Ministry assumes the Casas Viejas mine does
not contaminate’.[^11STORY1_8] People are experiencing in their own bodies the
effects of the rocks extracted from the mine.

Despite having grown strong as a social movement and having gained
knowledge of mining activities throughout their organizational process,
it is still difficult for them to track down the companies that invest
in these activities. Neither the state nor the national government, at
their various levels, accept responsibility for reporting, claiming it
is up to the other. The result is that no data is available. There is no
explanation either for the authorisation of mining projects in natural
reserves. The article mentioned above indicates that according to the
Mexican Competitiveness Institute, ‘the files of each concession can
only be accessed by those who can prove a legal interest in them or else
through the General Transparency and Access to Public Information
Act’.[^11STORY1_9]

What they do know is that concessions have changed owners more than
once. This is very common in the mining industry, where activities
usually start with prospecting and exploration projects in the hands of
small or medium-sized national companies, which are later sold to larger
investors, either national or transnational, once it is determined that
there are enough metal resources to warrant mining. With very large
mining projects, tracing the path of concessions is, thus, complicated.
In many cases this is because when the large mining companies set up in
any given country they do so through subsidiaries with very complex
legal ties that make it difficult to establish their legal relationship
with their parent company.

The localities of Escuintla and Acacoyagua were the first to organize
against mining activities. After the FPDS was formed, they joined the
Red Mexicana de Afectados por la Minería (REMA or Mexican Network of
People Affected by Mining) and since then they have deployed different
strategies to defend their territory. These strategies range from direct
actions, such as the roadblocks mentioned above, to information
processes, assembly statements and media and legal actions. Their
actions quickly met with retaliations. But as one of the participants in
the roadblock said, ‘We are defending our land so that our children can
continue living here as happily as we have’.[^11STORY1_10]

The communities lifted the roadblocks in 2018 but they maintain an
active surveillance system, with individuals from the communities
patrolling on their bicycles. If they spot a mining truck coming, they
immediately alert the rest, who mobilize to block it.

This combination of strategies has in a certain way made it possible to
stop the effects they were suffering. ‘People are happy now because they
have seen a dramatic change. We have a photograph from 2019 that shows
river prawns being served at a lunch they organised in the mountains to
welcome a journalist. People are starting to see more life in the
river’, Díaz Vera reported. As for the skin conditions, an improvement
is already evident in both children and adults. However, the more
serious liver and kidney diseases persist.

There are two dates that are key for the communities of the
municipality, as they reaffirm their struggle. Every 20 June, which
marks a new anniversary of the beginning of the process of organization,
they gather by the river for regional singing and dancing, poetry
reading and announcements. It is a significant cultural moment that
alludes to the organizational process. In December, a festival is held
in honor of the resistance, where the communities gather together to
feast to the beat of marimbas and there are raffles and a piñata. Last
year on 15 September there was also an ‘anti-mining character’ who
marched in the national holiday parade, revealing that the resistance
‘is now part of the identity of these communities even at the
institutional level’, said Díaz Vera.

## Changing the model

Despite the negative impacts and the harmful effects on health and the
environment, today’s economies continue to be based on extractivism.
They put the rules of exchange value above the rules of use value. The
price of nature is more important than the value we place on its care to
preserve it for current and future generations.

The system of economic domination is underpinned by an ideology that is
completely removed from the earth and its living beings, including
people. The system of technological development upholds those premises,
causing a negative impact on bodies and territories.

Tracing the path of these technologies clearly is an enormously complex
task mainly due to the lack of transparency and accountability
mechanisms in each of the nodes involved in their production. The
solutions offered by technological corporations are associated with
‘green’ capitalism, that is, a set of ‘responses’ to the climate crisis
that do not question current consumption patterns, but rather propose
‘clean’ ways of continuing to consume eternally through energy produced
by large hydroelectric dams, wind or solar farms, biofuels and
geo-engineering. In a recent open letter, more than 230 civil society
organizations from around the world called on the European Commission to
reassess its raw material sourcing plans due to the many irregularities
they present, their lack of transparency mechanisms and their failure to
heed the growing resistance of local populations.[^11STORY1_11] ‘To display true
leadership in climate matters’, the letter states, ‘the EC needs to
establish and put in place policies for a low-energy, low-material
transition in Europe, with a far greater focus on demand reduction,
recycling, and contributing a fair share of support to Global South
nations to redress the relentless centuries-long extraction of wealth
from the South to Europe’.[^11STORY1_12]

In Latin America, efforts to defend the region’s territories have been
underway for decades, with diverse strategies aimed at caring for
people’s lives and their environment. The struggles are waged at various
levels, but, as the experience in Acacoyagua shows us, what has
succeeded in stopping contamination has been a strong organizational
process and non-violent direct actions.

In order to build future technologies that are sensitive to the call to
protect life, it is necessary to reconnect with other local, nearby
models of consumption that foster diversity and a connection with the
people who produce, models that take into account the cycles of life (it
takes nature millions of years to produce minerals and oil), and designs
that respond to these premises.

These other forms of development that respect the needs of local
communities will also enable us to think of ways of to relocate
technologies and their production and circulation, promote open models
of software and hardware development, reduce and diversify consumption,
respond to issues that are localized, and give rise to proposals based
on caring for people, communities and environments. That may perhaps be
the technological development that will enable us to see a desired
impact on the worlds we inhabit.

Translation: [*Laura Pérez
Carrara*](https://www.apc.org/en/author/laura-perez-carrara)

We are struggling to survive.
[*https://www.apc.org/en/blog/we-are-struggling-survive-resistance-against-mining-acacoyagua-chiapas*](https://www.apc.org/en/blog/we-are-struggling-survive-resistance-against-mining-acacoyagua-chiapas)

[^11STORY1_1]: Minería en tu Vida, Minerales en el celular.
    https://www.lamineriaentuvida.com.ar/minerales-en-el-celular/

[^11STORY1_2]: Comisión Nacional para el Conocimiento y Uso de la Biodiversidad,
    ‘¿Qué es la biodiversidad?’, Biodiversidad mexicana, 31 Julio 2022.
    https://www.biodiversidad.gob.mx/biodiversidad/que\_es.html

[^11STORY1_3]: Andrés Domínguez, ‘Los conflictos futuros de Chiapas por la
    defensa del territorio’, Chiapas Paralelo, 1 Septiembre 2019.
    https://www.chiapasparalelo.com/noticias/chiapas/2019/09/los-conflictos-futuros-de-chiapas-por-la-defensa-del-territorio/

[^11STORY1_4]: Marco Antonio Martínez García, ‘Minería pone en riesgo a áreas
    naturales protegidas: Gustavo Castro’, Programa de las Américas, 10
    Febrero 2015.
    https://www.americas.org/es/mineria-pone-en-riesgo-a-areas-naturales-protegidas-gustavo-castro/

[^11STORY1_5]: Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía, Espacio y datos de
    México: Acacoyagua.
    https://www.inegi.org.mx/app/mapa/espacioydatos/default.aspx?ag=07001

[^11STORY1_6]: Outlet Minero, Titanio, usos y propiedades.
    https://outletminero.org/titanio/

[^11STORY1_7]: Observatorio de Conflictos Mineros de América Latina, ‘Habitantes
    del Soconusco, Chiapas, se organizan para detener la minería’,
    Movimiento M4, 14 Octubre 2016.
    https://www.ocmal.org/habitantes-del-soconusco-chiapas-se-organizan-para-detener-la-mineria/

[^11STORY1_8]: Rodrigo Soberanes, ‘Comunidades se oponen a 21 proyectos mineros
    en la Sierra Madre de México’, Mongabay, 20 Octubre 2017.
    https://es.mongabay.com/2017/10/no-la-mineria-la-lucha-conservar-la-sierra-madre-mexico/

[^11STORY1_9]: Soberanes, ‘Comunidades se oponen a 21 proyectos mineros en la
    Sierra Madre de México’.

[^11STORY1_10]: Observatorio de Conflictos Mineros de América Latina. ‘Habitantes
    del Soconusco, Chiapas, se organizan para detener la minería’.

[^11STORY1_11]: Civil society (234 organisations and academics and 110
    individuals), ‘Open letter: Concerns on EU critical raw materials
    plans’, Friends of the Earth Europe, 28 September 2020.
    https://www.foeeurope.org/sites/default/files/resource\_use/2020/civil\_society\_open\_letter\_-\_concerns\_on\_eu\_critical\_raw\_material\_plans.pdf

[^11STORY1_12]: Civil society (234 organisations, community platforms and
    academics), ‘Media Release: We can’t mine our way out of the climate
    crisis’, The Gaia Foundation, 28 September 2020.
    http://gaiafoundation.org/ec-we-cant-mine-our-way-out-of-the-climate-crisis
