---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# STORY 4. Futuring Data for Eco-Social Health

### Community Oceans Futures Group[^14STORY4_1] at Simon Fraser University in Vancouver, Canada

In North America, shoreline cleanups have become a popular community
activity. The goal is to remove trash from creek beds, riverside parks,
lakefronts and beaches so that it does not end up in open water
ecosystems. These activities give participants a sense of accomplishment
through getting outside, getting some exercise and spending time in
nature.

A typical cleanup is about more than just picking up trash, however.
Volunteers are also asked to count and categorize the items that they
collect, and weigh the total volume of garbage collected. The data is
then uploaded to a central ‘citizen science’ repository through an App
called Ocean Swell.[^14STORY4_2] This app uses standardized categories to
tabulate the trash found in shoreline ecosystems.

The result is a longitudinal North American database of human-generated
marine debris. This data has been successfully mobilized to advocate for
new marine protected areas, bans on single-use plastics, and Extended
Producer Responsibility policies.

Unfortunately, however, little to no reduction in the total amount of
plastic pollution has been documented because of these activities or the
resulting policy changes.[^14STORY4_3] What is more, a 2022 meta-review of
citizen science projects in the journal *Sustainability* found that
volunteer data gathering had no clear link to behavior changes that
could ‘lead to cultural shifts’ in plastics use and consumption.[^14STORY4_4]

Given this state of affairs, our work tries to understand and rethink
the link between citizen-generated insights and social change. We want
to develop new tools to support citizen participation in knowledge
building about issues like marine garbage.

To this end, in fall 2022 we did some background research by holding a
shoreline cleanup at an oceanside park in Vancouver, Canada. Afterwards
we held focus groups to better understand how participants experienced
data gathering.

The first thing we noticed was that participants were deeply affected by
what they witnessed during the cleanup. For example, several
participants talked about finding a ‘shocking’ amount of styrofoam
particles mixed into the sand on the shoreline, leading one participant
to observe that it was like ‘trying to count a liquid’.

However, the act of tallying quickly displaced people’s sense of shock
or outrage. Tallying became the focus of cleanup activities because
participants needed to figure out how to fit trash into the categories
provided. Groups spent a great deal of time discussing how to interpret
and fill the tally sheet.

Overall, while participants reported feeling positive about contributing
to a cleaner environment they did not exhibit a deeper awareness or
understanding of the scale of the trash problem, nor did they make the
cultural connections between ocean plastics and consumerist behaviors.
We found that the event didn’t help them develop an understanding of
their own relationship to the problem, or, indeed, their relationship to
potential solutions.

In the face of these challenges, our goal is to design alternative ways
of producing insights about marine health. In the months since our
cleanup we’ve been working on design solutions to complement or replace
tally sheets.

Our first step was to better articulate the problem.

Humans are fundamentally interconnected with marine ecosystems. But our
entire system of knowledge production about marine health is based on
the assumption that humans are separate from nature; that humans are
autonomous, conscious and intentional in how we produce knowledge about
nature. In this way of thinking, we humans should gather ‘data’ about
‘trash’ before processing it into information and eventually scientific
knowledge about a topic like marine health.

This process of abstraction leads to a huge loss of situated knowledge,
as is shown in Figure 1. The data that volunteers gather gets tabulated
into information that is used to produce scientific insights as well as
policy interventions. But people’s connection to trash – their sense of
shock or their creative observations – are lost in the process.

![Figure 1. Data Activation Gaps (Concept Katherine Reilly and Melanie
Vidakis, illustration Jihyun Park)](imgs/story4img1a.jpg)

<br/>

When we ask volunteers to do the work of collecting data about ‘trash’ -
when we frame the problem as one in which the ocean and marine debris
are discrete, separate and measurable via the objective apparatus of
science - we are asking volunteers to pretend that garbage and oceans
are separate from ourselves. In doing this, we are asking them to
reproduce their hegemonic relationship with the ecosystems that they
actually form a part of. So in producing knowledge about quantities of
trash, citizen science initiatives are reproducing the assumptions that
give humans permission to relate to the ocean in harmful ways. The work
is counterproductive to the goal of producing healthy ecosystems that
also include healthy humans.

As a possible solution, one of our team members suggested asking
volunteers to imagine their bodies as the ocean, and put the garbage
*in* their bodies. This would help them visualize how their health would
be affected if they had garbage in their own personal ecosystem.

![Figure 2. What if your body was the Ocean? (Concept Javier Fernandez,
illustration Jihyun Park)](imgs/story4img2a.jpg)

<br/>

Ironically this is not a metaphor! Recent research has found
microplastics in human *placentas*, and research has also shown that
they are ingested by newborn babies.[^14STORY4_5] Since microplastics carry
substances that interfere with the human hormonal system, scientists
hypothesize that the trash that floats in each of our personal ‘oceans’
is already having long term health effects.

But we ended up moving beyond a body-as-metaphor-approach because our
human relationship to the ocean is not metaphorical.

Instead we decided to embrace a more-than-human approach to
contemplating our relationship to ecosystems. More-than-human approaches
seek to produce knowledge through exploring and experiencing the
relationships between different parts of an ecosystem. In doing so they
de-centre humans as the purpose for and source of all change in the
world, and reposition them as but one factor enmeshed in complex
relationships with both the natural and built environments.

Doing this work requires a fundamental rethink of the notion of ‘data’
as the driver of knowledge. Data is usually positioned as discoverable
*facts*, *containers* of meaning, or solidified *agreements* about what
we all assume to be true. These visions of data all suggest that the
world has been stopped, like a butterfly specimen pinned to a board,
ready for our inspection. And of course, we humans are the ones who have
‘pinned down’ these ‘specimens’.

In contrast, relational approaches to data-as-action, data-as-movement
or data-as-mutual-becoming understand the world to be in constant
motion, and given this, focus on the processes of meaning making that
surround observations or experiences. They might ask us to explore how
it feels to see tiny beads of styrofoam mixed into the sand on a beach;
to imagine what our relationship to the ocean might be like under
different ‘truth’ conditions; or, to explore the political
representation of different species in struggles over how to ‘know’ the
world. Relational approaches tell us that the truth of styrofoam on a
beach is not in *its* existence, but in our mutual and collective
*subsistence*. They understand that data isn’t about plastic, but is
itself plastic.

The approach represents a shift away from the DIKW model[^14STORY4_6] in which
**D**ata gets categorized into **I**nformation that can inform
**K**nowledge and **W**isdom for use in, say, policy making. Instead, we
want to develop an ERAC framework in which we center people’s
**E**xperiences and processes of **C**hange through continuous
**R**eflection and **A**ction (see Figure 3). In our vision, an ERAC
approach becomes the foundation for building meshworks of knowing how to
rebuild direct ties between people and their environment.[^14STORY4_7],[^14STORY4_8]

![Figure 3. Meshworks as alternative forms of Ecosystem Knowledge (Concept
and illustration Jihyun Park)](imgs/story4img3a.jpg)

<br/>

Ultimately, in doing this work we hope to reposition data as a
generative and liberating *action*, rather than as a *form* of capture
and control. Our goal is for observations or experiences to be freed of
the categories and parameters that prevent social change.

Our next steps will be to continue to develop new techniques or tools
that complement or replace the tally sheet. Our group is exploring
design and creativity as tools to help us think *impulsively* –that is
with passion, desire, intuition and inclination– about our relationship
to the health of the ocean. We plan to draw on futuring and speculative
design to help participants in shoreline cleanups imagine a world free
of human-generated marine debris.


[^14STORY4_1]: The Community Oceans Futures Group at Simon Fraser University
    (SFU) is an interdisciplinary collaboration between scholars and
    community members studying the relationship between knowledge
    production, design and post-human ontologies. In practical terms,
    this means that we are rethinking what it means to ‘know’ or ‘relate
    to’ the world around us. Our current project focuses on reimagining
    how humans relate to human debris in marine ecosystems. The group
    consists of Rachel Horst, Jihyun Park, Dr. Katherine Reilly, Dr.
    Gillian Russell, Ryland Shaw and Melanie Vidakis. We are also
    working with Oscar Chu, Sunho Chung, Javier Fernandez, Maia Puyat,
    Jaddie Tan, and Xiao Wei from Vancouver’s Centre for Digital Media
    (CDM).

[^14STORY4_2]: Ocean Conservancy.
    https://oceanconservancy.org/trash-free-seas/international-coastal-cleanup/cleanswell/

[^14STORY4_3]: Keisha Rukikaire, ‘Comprehensive assessment on marine litter and
    plastic pollution confirms need for urgent global action’, United
    Nations Environment Program, 21 October 2021.
    http://www.unep.org/news-and-stories/press-release/comprehensive-assessment-marine-litter-and-plastic-pollution

[^14STORY4_4]: Cristina L. Popa, Simona I. Dontu, Dan Savastru, and Elfrida M.
    Carstea, ‘Role of Citizen Scientists in Environmental Plastic Litter
    Research—A Systematic Review’, Sustainability 14.20 (2022): 13265.
    https://doi.org/10.3390/su142013265

[^14STORY4_5]: Gwyn Wright, ‘Microplastics can cross placenta into unborn babies,
    study shows’, The Independent, 28 December 2022.
    https://www.independent.co.uk/news/health/microplastics-in-humans-baby-placenta-b2252375.html

[^14STORY4_6]: Jennifer Rowley, ‘The wisdom hierarchy: Representations of the
    DIKW hierarchy’, Journal of Information Science 33.2 (2007):
    163–180. https://doi.org/10.1177/0165551506070706

[^14STORY4_7]: Tim Ingold, Bringing Things to Life: Creative Entanglements in a
    World of Materials, ESRC National Centre for Research Methods,
    University of Aberdeen, Scotland, 2010.
    https://eprints.ncrm.ac.uk/id/eprint/1306/1/0510\_creative\_entanglements.pdf

[^14STORY4_8]: Kari Martin, ‘The Hope of Creation – a Conversation with Timothy
    Ingold’, The Kenan Institute for Ethics, 26 January 2021.
    https://kenan.ethics.duke.edu/the-hope-of-creation-a-conversation-with-timothy-ingold/
