---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# STORY 6. Becoming a Loss: On the Resolution (or not) of Conflicts in Autonomous Communities

### Stefania Acevedo

One of the strongest experiences I have gone through in the last two
years has been to face my process of leaving one of the spaces where I
had found the most vitality and political power since 2014. A
combination of rage, affection, disappointment, joy, confusion, doubts,
the feeling of missing those I felt close to, melancholy and
(im)potency, to mention perhaps the registers where I locate how I have
felt my passage through the *hackerspace* Rancho Electrónico.

This *hackerspace* located in Mexico City has a long history as a
self-managed space. Before being founded as such, the Rancho Electronico
lived as a HackLab in the squat Zona Autónoma Makhnovtchina (ZAM).[^16STORY6_1]
Eventually, the people who met there to experiment with free *software*
in its intersection with Zapatismo, *hacker* culture, free media
creation and computer security, decided, in 2013, to join with other
collectives such as the Inverted Crater Cooperative and the anarchist
collective Fury in the Streets to pay together the rent for a warehouse.
Afterwards, they continued to move into different buildings in the
Colonia Obrera.

The story I am going to tell is a partial version, yes, because it is
mine. It is precisely where it finds its value, because it implies
giving place to just a little piece of the experiences of those of us
who have gone through the Electronic Ranch. In the narration there are
affections that do not fail to show themselves and play a fundamental
role in the way we face an event. To recognize a value in this is
important because, on the contrary, the bet for conceiving life only
through data implies a neutrality or objectivity that is impossible, no
matter how much information one has.

Until a few years ago I felt that what I had experienced at Rancho
Electrónico was guided by joyful militancy. I saw us full of life and
impulse to sustain this space, to find the resources to pay the rent,
electricity, water, to have chips, bread and coffee to share with those
who attended a workshop, to organize a *hackmitin* or other events. This
took place, but unfortunately it was also accompanied by profound
machismo, transphobia, violence and exercises of power. Sometimes we are
ashamed to recognize that we have inhabited spaces like this, but
telling this story is also a bet to resonate in others how we can lose
those patriarchal skins that surround us, those skins that smell of
transphobia, of exclusion of dissidence; those rigid skins that do not
allow themselves to be permeated.

The first time I went to an assembly of the Electronic Ranch[^16STORY6_2] I
witnessed a very strong and explicit discussion, where there was anger,
frustration and I don't remember if there was shouting. There was also a
lot of silence from everyone there. Nobody wanted to take sides. It gave
me that anxious feeling of not knowing what to do and seeing that no one
was doing anything. To date, that discussion has not been resolved,
there were no ways to mediate the conflict. After that one, there were
others and we did not manage to resolve them either. I can take
responsibility for having tried unsuccessfully with the Working Group on
Violence that after a few months we decided to close because we were
unable to do anything between our limited energy and lack of tools.[^16STORY6_3]
I remember that I decided to leave the Rancho Electrónico because in an
assembly, which had the purpose of delivering the results of a survey
conducted by the Working Group on Violence, one of the participants said
that free *software* was the important thing and that he was not
interested in ‘ideologies’ such as feminism. Although this had been
evidenced multiple times before, it finally dawned on me that I had to
stop insisting on a space where people who decided to continue with the
*hackerspace* did not see a problem with this statement nor could they
see that this, as well as most tech spaces, is a hostile space for trans
and cis women. One has to learn to stop insisting and recognize that the
fascination of tech for tech's sake, even if it is open source, wins out
even in these places.

I'm always late for everything, I join collectivities when they are
already crumbling, when they are past their best years. This makes me
feel like a loser but I'm glad because I don't like to hang out with
winners. Besides, I perceive that this fiction of the golden years of a
collectivity, about which only the elders can speak, that is, those who
have been there the longest, is also a cover-up of the abuses and
conflicts that were lived inside. Who can tell the stories to the new
generations? This is experienced in the self-managed collectives,
because those who are still there are the ones who tell the history of
the spaces, explain the absences and the presences. Before me, a lot of
other women had left, and when I was arriving, driven by fascination, I
could not see that as a problem, nor did I question it. All this happens
through a narrative that is always partial. That is why it is important
that there is a diversity of stories, that they are contradictory, that
they offer other versions, and that they are not closed under the logic
of data, where there is a fantasy of processing as much information as
necessary to offer only one type of reading of an event. When I
recognize the partiality of my narration, I know that it is an
ethical-political act insofar as I am taking a position on how to
narrate it, in the data that position is obturated, it seems that one
can be neutral and that there is a separation from any bias.

When data is collected on self-managing collectives in these
territories, categories are often created that homologize the practices
and *ethos* of those who participate in it. Certain keywords can make a
semantic universe of \#tags that make up what *should be*, in this case,
a hackerspace: technology, free software, autonomy, commons, hacking,
mutual support, etc. What is almost always expected is to respond to
certain already known cases, this raises expectations about what to find
when lifting those data. Perhaps in hackerspaces elsewhere, where there
are certain assurances and material conditions, people can deal with
innovative issues around technology and free software. While, as far as
collective projects in this territory are concerned, the priority is to
self-manage a space-home-shelter, in addition to having to face the
emotional work involved in the conflict in a collective walk. It seems
to me that these differential conditions may lead us to wonder if, in
fact, a space where technology is not so present, understood from a
hegemonic conception where only certain practices would be validated and
others not, continues to be a hackerspace. We can see how a certain
classification begins to be exercised from a certain reference to a
mold/data in which perhaps we do not fit.

That is why I distrust the logic of data, I see it as petrified, I feel
that it encloses in a generalization the pretension of making us
transparent, and of exhausting all our complexity. The nuances are what
a datum cannot contain. I trust that asking ourselves how to narrate
ourselves also implies other aesthetic forms that go beyond data. We
will have to invite ourselves, then, to the contamination of the
hegemonic way of understanding data, where transparency is demanded and
a calculation is made that only serves the machinery of death. This will
imply changing the known interfaces and producing other *common notions*
that do not remain only in the digital. Trying to tell our stories
beyond the numbers, beyond the *accounting* as that which refers to what
can be divided and made into a figure; and move, instead, to the
*narratable*, with all those contradictions and complications that
cannot be fully trapped or synthesized.

I know that in this territory called Mexico, where loss is painfully
predominant, it seems absurd to bet on it, but I would like to emphasize
that the losses we live with here on a daily basis are violently imposed
on us, making us believe that it is the only condition of existence. But
there is another type of loss that we can choose and that can help us to
transform ourselves, especially those of us who bet on collective work.

I do not want to lose the spaces that have been won and for which so
many people have fought, leaving energy, affection and scratches. But I
do want to lose the ways in which we have learned to silence discomfort
in order to privilege the appearance of the radical, the contentious,
and being indifferent to painful experiences because it seems that
maintaining a self-managed space itself is more important than the
people who sustain it.

Not only Rancho Electrónico, but also many collectives that bet on
self-organization, have faced in the last years the difficulty of
knowing how to deal with conflicts, mainly gender conflicts that
evidence the patriarchal forms that permeate the organizations; and,
even more, with ways to solve them in a communitarian way. Once a friend
of mine told me that we do not even have to solve them, but to accept
the power to act politically from these internal difficulties. I do not
know if we are going to achieve it, but we continue, from different
fronts, to work for it.

This narration is the way in which I try to give place to a loss, yes of
collectivity, but not of horizon, that I carry with me and share it with
others because where we learn to lose there is also resistance.

![Figure 1. Rancho Electrónico's first venue in the warehouse it shared with Cráter Invertido and Furia en las Calles, 2013.](imgs/01fachada.jpg)

<br/>


[^16STORY6_1]: Dicidente Radio, ‘La Zona Autónoma Makhnovtchina (ZAM)’, Indy
    Media, 3 Diciembre 2010.
    http://mexico.indymedia.org/spip.php?article1783

[^16STORY6_2]: Rancho Electrónico. https://ranchoelectronico.org

[^16STORY6_3]: Anamhoo, Hacklib, Steffff, and Boox, ‘Carta del Grupo de trabajo
    sobre violencias en el RE’, 10 Enero 2023.
    https://transitional.anarchaserver.org/jirafeau/f.php?h=2btzr20Z&d=1
