---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# STORY 8. Resisting Platform Scams in Brazil

### Abel Guerra, Gabriel Pereira, Rafael Grohmann, Ludmila Costhek Abílio, Bruno Moreschi, and Amanda Jurno[^18STORY8_1],[^18STORY8_2],[^18STORY8_3]

Imagine you are in an underpaid job trying to make ends meet. The money
you make depends on the tasks you receive and complete. You work hard,
but as costs keep rising, it feels nearly impossible to make it work —
uncertainty is not a luxury you can afford at the moment. Yet, every day
you are greeted by your “employer” with a promise: if you just perform
well, if you just complete a certain number of tasks, then you could get
a lot of money. They say success is around the corner as long as you’re
resilient enough to pursue it. The promise is hardly fulfilled and all
the effort and stress put into the job often turn into frustration.

You may start to feel you are being deceived by this job. An opportunity
to make quick money? Sounds more like a scam. Add some mobile apps,
continuously generated data, algorithmic governance, and a lot of hype
to the description above, and you end up with a somewhat ‘fair’
description of the very unfair platform economy.

Platforms have become a crucial part of our everyday lives and habits:
we can use apps to get rides or shop for same-day groceries. What makes
this economy tick is a set of algorithms used to organize and assign
labor to workers, whether locally or around the globe. In recent years,
it has become increasingly evident that these platform workers are not
being paid enough, do not have their labor rights respected, and often
are made to do illegal or dangerous things to comply with platforms'
demands.

It is not rare to see platform companies calling workers who learn to
work around the apps to improve their earning ‘scammers’. But if we
shift this perspective, it turns out that scam is actually a core
feature of this platform economy itself, just as much as the algorithms
and data that run it. The dishonesties and uncertainties inscribed in
platforms’ algorithmic management are a part of workers' (often labeled
‘partners’ or ‘contractors’) daily journeys as they go about their work.
In that sense, platform companies are powerful and often legitimized
scammers that make use of lobbies, misinformation, and infrastructural
asymmetries to foreground injustice and uncertainty as labor models.

So what do workers do in this scenario? They don't sit idly waiting for
change to happen as mere pawns in the ‘platform's game’... Instead, they
resist and subvert platform scams through different tactics and
strategies.

Take the example of Uber, a popular platform for ride-hailing. One of
Uber's features is surge pricing, an algorithmically-induced raise in
fares to make drivers’ supply meet occasional high demand levels. In his
earlier days as an Uber driver in São Paulo (Brazil), Felipe[^18STORY8_4],
associated surge pricing with a feeling of excitement and the
opportunity to earn more money. However, just like other drivers, he
came to understand that this was ‘more of an illusion than reality’, as
he often receives regular fare rides despite being in a surge area. In
other cases, Felipe has noticed surge pricing disappear as soon as he
arrives at a surge zone. One might say Uber is not directly pocketing
Felipe and other drivers’ money. However, it is constantly playing an
illusion game in which drivers are scammed by an eternal promise of
financial gain, spending time and fuel to keep Uber’s wheel rolling.
Just like other facets of uncertain and dishonest algorithmic
management, this is not an error: surge pricing is, in fact, operating
as intended. It keeps workers hooked and Uber's finances going. Drivers’
needs, however, are nowhere in sight.

Felipe does not just accept being scammed by Uber. In fact, workers like
him find ways to resist, responding to platform scams through different
tactics and strategies. A case in point is Uber drivers’ appropriation
of surge pricing as a protest instrument that grants visibility to their
demands. During the 2019 global Uber drivers strike, Brazilian driver’s
WhatsApp (a messaging app) groups were filled with screenshots showing
the surge’s reddish shade taking over the map of different cities. While
some of these groups were created with the purpose of organizing
demonstrations for the strike, WhatsApp groups are a well-established
communication infrastructure for drivers to speak also in their
day-to-day work. As drivers went offline, surge pricing kicked in and
made the strike visible to drivers, riders and Uber itself. The
‘bleeding screen’ resulting from the increase of surge pricing areas, as
one driver put it, was proof that the strike was, in fact, working and
disrupting Uber’s revenue and rider’s experiences.

Another example of resistance is the so-called ‘click farm’ platforms in
Brazil, which are self-described Public Relations agencies focused on
social media. One of them claims to have the mission to overcome the
‘pain’ of people who need more followers while at the same time helping
others generate extra income. Thus, they promise real followers to their
customers and easy money to workers. How do they do it? Through scam!

Maria, a worker in a click farm, needs to follow, comment and like
social media accounts for a very small sum, often US\$0.0001 (yes, you
read that right). The platform has told her that it's an easy task that
can be done in seconds. But even many US\$0.0001 don't build up to much
at the end of the day. Maria worked for years in the informal market and
was even a waste picker. She has no choice in terms of deciding on more
'ethical' or 'moral' labor. Every day, since before the emergence of
digital platforms, she fights for her own survival, from gig to gig.
Since Maria started working for click farms, some of them have even
changed their name a few times, or were sued by social media platforms
and no longer exist. When that happens, Maria asks for help to find the
next 'hot' platform to work on.

Tired of doing so much for so little, Maria and other workers resort to
their own tactics. One of them is to create several fake accounts in
order to do more tasks and earn more money. The problem is: the fake
accounts they create need to be ‘convincing’ in order not to be banned
by Instagram and TikTok (social media platforms) for being a ‘scam’.
After all, if Maria ends up being blocked by the platforms, she will
receive nothing for her work —not even US\$0.0001!

But imagine how many clicks it takes to take care of 100 fake accounts.
All this while caring for one's children, family, and home. As click
farms mobilize a predominantly gendered work force, platform labor is
intimately articulated to domestic work. Faced with similar overwhelming
demands, she soon discovered how to use bots to automate their tasks.
She joined the parallel markets for bots, where workers buy and sell
tools to automate their labor —at least to some extent. For US\$3, Maria
buys a robot that can run up to 300 accounts at the same time. Life gets
easier, and her pay is boosted —at least until the platform changes or
disappears again!

The experience of Felipe and Maria, as well as many others, shows how
platform workers are not mere pawns in the platforms' game. Although the
platforms are the ones who define what is (il)legal, (ir)regular, and
(un)desirable in their systems, workers find ways to fight back and
demand justice in a system that doesn't care about them, with their own
tools. Workers' tactics of resistance, these and other stories, should
help us to reimagine platform labor: To create a world in which
platforms don't scam, and workers are not forced to
resist.

[^18STORY8_1]: This story draws on Grohmann, Pereira, Guerra, Abílio, Moreschi,
    and Jurno. A version of this story was also published as a blog post
    on the London School of Economics and Political Science.

[^18STORY8_2]: Rafael Grohmann, Gabriel Pereira, Abel Guerra, Ludmila Costhek
    Abilio, Bruno Moreschi, and Amanda Jurno, ‘Platform scams: Brazilian
    workers’ experiences of dishonest and uncertain algorithmic
    management’, New Media & Society 24.7 (2022): 1611–1631.
    https://doi.org/10.1177/14614448221099225

[^18STORY8_3]: Abel Guerra and Gabriel Pereira, ‘Are scams a core feature of the
    platform economy?’, London School of Economics and Political
    Science, 1 August 2022.
    https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/medialse/2022/08/01/are-scams-a-core-feature-of-the-platform-economy/

[^18STORY8_4]: Felipe and Maria are fictional characters based on the accounts
    and experiences of workers we have interviewed.
